It's Thursday the 11th of July 2019 and I'm here with Peter Hussey at his home in
Ellen Valley. Peter thank you very much for agreeing to this recorded history.
Just like to start with you telling me a little bit about yourself, your
background and your family. Okay well I was born in Tempe and lived in South
Pembrokeshire for the first 19 years of my life but then left South Pembrokeshire to
move to Newcastle upon Tyne because of my father's career and I then moved up
there at the end of my schooling and joined Fennec Limited which is a retail
organization and there I met my wife. So fairly quickly we then settled down to
married life in the Northeast but having got involved in retailing it's a
job that tends to demand that as you move through the ranks you also move
through the geography and so we went to live in Edinburgh, subsequently Manchester, Leeds,
Liverpool, Bath, London and back again up to Merseyside. So we'd moved around a
considerable amount. My parents were becoming quite elderly by the time that
we had finished our career and we decided that it would be very good if we
could move back into Wales and so we started looking for a business which
would also provide us with a home and those two things were essentials.
We found that in the drovers tea rooms in Billswells and we moved in there
subsequently initially with Maggie's mother and then subsequently with
my mum and dad moving up from Temby to Bills as well and they had about the
last five years of their life with us in Bills. So that's the very quick resume
of the geography of my career and life but that brought us back into Wales
and I had come to the Ellam Valley probably for the first time in 1952 I
would guess soon after Clarewyn was opened by the Queen and we came up to
to look at it. We certainly weren't here for the Queen's visit and I
think subsequently we probably came up reasonably often. My dad although he
drove all week for his as part of his job and still delighted in taking us
out for rides on a Sunday so I think the Ellam Valley was one of the
destinations that we would have come to fairly frequently and that left me with
a picture of the Red House and the White Houses of Glenrhyven and as the entrance
to the Ellam Valley and then probably the Salt House and the the Waterworks as
the second entry point into the valley and I had a very clear recollection of
that that always stayed with me so the words Ellam Valley would produce those
two pictures. When we moved up to Bills I thought it would be nice one evening to
bring Maggie out with her mother and we came out to the Ellam Valley from Bills.
Maggie was just totally blown away by it. I couldn't imagine
that there was such a place so close to where we were living and she just loved
it and we weren't able to to come out very often because the the drovers as it
became very successful demanded 24-7 involvement so it would be fairly
infrequent that we managed to come up here. Then at the point where we were
starting to think about retirement we'd been looking for some sort of
interesting house and some friends rang up one Sunday afternoon to tell us that
they'd driven into the Ellam Village and had seen that this house was for sale.
Now my father had told me about Ellam Village and during the time that he was
staying with us he had driven up here and mentioned it to me but I had no idea
what the village was because of course at that time it was totally surrounded
by 60 foot high cupresses so you couldn't see it from the road from Redd to the
Ellam Valley and even as you went down to the visitor centre and you couldn't
see anything in the village at all. As you got down to the Bailey Bridge there
was a sign on it, a wooden sign which I think is still there, saying Ellam Valley
Lodge. So I presumed that this Bailey Bridge must be some sort of driveway to
something private and I had no idea that the village was here although I knew
that the village was somewhere around. So when my friend told me that there was a
house for sale here we came out that evening and saw it and just loved it.
It was perfect for what we wanted and so we entered into the very long process of
buying it. I think that the controlling body for water had instructed
the water companies that they shouldn't have property that wasn't directly
in producing water and so the companies have to sell off whatever properties
they had. Locally that involved Welsh Water in deciding to create the Ellam
Valley Trust and to move its property across to the trust and Severntrent who
owned the minority of houses in the village decided that they would put
theirs up for sale as they became available. Now ours was already available.
The previous tenant had moved out I think two years earlier and it was
not in good condition but they had put it up for sale and we made an offer
which was accepted after a period and so our offer was accepted I think on the
17th of October but it took until the 17th of March was to actually get possession.
I think that was quite largely because Severntrent weren't particularly
interested in selling the property and so we're not giving high priority to our
requests for information and that sort of thing so it was a drawn-out process.
Eventually we got possession and moved in and began to work on the inside of
the building to bring it up to the standard that it now is. That was quite a
long process again because during the tenancy of the building which was
from start these buildings have tended to have problems with condensation on
the stone mullions of the windows and that resulted in problems elsewhere.
The quick answer to this had been to paint them and of course we were aware of the
fact that that was a major problem also some of the pointing that had been done
over the years on the outside had been done on the cement and that was again a
problem so we had to gradually relime the building by using lime mortar in the
pointing on the exterior. We used lime plaster on interior walls and lime based
paint and we very very long process of scraping the paint off the stone
mullions and getting them back to their original shape. We also realigned some of
the rooms on the ground floor which gave us a lot more light and a lot more
usable space. The house had of course been designed for artisans living here
in the 1900s so there was not a lot of utility space and there were areas which
were no longer particularly appropriate such as a ladder. So we worked on the
interior of the building but of course keeping the exterior very close to its
original format and in fact returning it to its original format. So we were then
able to move in some two years later when we were successful in selling the
rovers in Bills and we moved in here on the 3rd of January 2008 which was a
delight for us. We had been able to to come up a little bit for weekends for
about six months before that. Maggie had been very ill and it was a delight for
us to be able to come up and get away from the business and relax for maybe
just 48 hours before we went back to the tumult.
Yes, they give you a different scene sometimes. It's a real help.
So we're very happy to move in here and we had a fairly wild garden. As you can imagine by this time it
hadn't had any human intervention for about four years. We still had the
pigsty and the pigsty had been built on. So previous tenants had built sheds onto
the pigsty. So it had begun to resemble something of like a Swiss chalet but
very unusable space because it was all tiny rooms at different levels and
with various obstructions inside. We on the other hand having moved into the
house realized that the lack of utility space was a problem. So we looked to a
way in which we could introduce some utility space, possibly a garage which
would have been very useful, and the utility space would have provided some
space that we could put things like washing machines into and maybe a
chest freezer or something like that. So we began to look at how we could do
that and we're thinking in terms of maybe a garage building adjacent to the
side of the cottage and that would have some utility space on the back and we
thought maybe we could get some sort of art space, some sort of studio into the
top of it, into the roof because we knew it would have to match the architecture
of the village and therefore it would have the high-pitched Luttien's roof
that all the buildings have. So we were beginning to think along those lines.
There is a problem with that for us here and that is that the sewer for the four
buildings that make up this section of the village all come past the back of
our house and in line with the sidewall it diverts and crosses over into the
field. So this meant that we couldn't extend backwards and we
couldn't extend sideways. That left us with something of a problem and we came
up with the idea that we could possibly build something in the garden. So we got
hold of, we had an architect and the architect got hold of the planners
which involved us with the heritage planning officer who came out and visited
and we had a very very helpful conversation and a walk around the
Seeing that other buildings in the village have out buildings, she felt that
it would not be too unusual for us to have one as well and so we began to
design the building that eventually became the cottage which is a self
catering unit. That has a bedroom, a bathroom, a kitchen and a garage and of
course a lounge and the lounge wonderfully has French windows that
overlook the Caen Gafault bird reserve so that is absolutely wonderful and that
was designed originally for use by our family but because of the restrictions
that planning put on us and linked with the restrictions or rather the
definitions that are applied by the building regs, the building had become
rather more expensive than we had initially expected. So we then decided
that we would try to recover some of that cost by using it for self catering
and that's what we've been doing in a relatively small way since that time. We
initially took control of the cottage from the builders in November 2009 and
so from the Easter of 2010 we began having a relatively small amount of self
catering rentals of the cottage. I think probably something in the region of six
or seven weeks of the year initially. We've been very successful with that in
that we have developed a very loyal group of returners and that linked with
new people coming each year has built up fairly substantially. We're now at a level
of about 19 weeks of the year. I think as other buildings in the village became
available, i.e. that seven trained to put them up for sale, then numbers 10 and
number 1 both also got purchased and used in a similar way but in both
those cases it is the entire house that is being let and so they are much bigger
units, three and four bedroom and they have approached in a much more
professional way than we have. We have never used an agency for example and
just basically left it for people to find us. So they've become much more
used than our spaces but that's good. It's bringing people to the valley,
getting them to appreciate it and from that point of view I also welcome the
way in which self catering has been developed in the town and I think that's
helped the town quite a bit and also the development of the Allen Oaks caravan
site which again brings more people in. It's very nice to see so many more
people using the village now and using the valley and of course that
was very much down to the removal of the cupressus which made such a difference.
When we first came the the midge problem was severe and during three months of
the year all you could do was run from the front door to the car and as
quickly as you could and get out of the valley as quickly as you could. It was
just unpleasant to be out in in the garden or outside the house and
particularly on high humidity days it really wasn't a place to go out in.
Removal of the trees helped that and gradually the problems become less and
less. It could also be that the removal of the chestnuts which was a great shame
and of course was down to disease of the chestnuts when they were removed.
That may well have also affected it. So we don't seem to have the problem
that we did have with midges and this year in particular we seem to have had a
very successful year from a midge point of view. Yes I think I mean it's lovely
to see the valley and the village being used but do you think there's any
downsides to that? Do you have any sort of litter problems? Not at this stage we
haven't seen that. As we walk around the valley we do come across
littering which is obviously sometimes quite purposeful that people sort of
hiding carrier bags of litter and briars and that sort of thing and the one
that annoys us enormously is when people pick up their dog poo in little plastic
bags and then leave them around for somebody else to pick up which is very
inconsiderate of them. But generally speaking the people who visit the valley
do so with great appreciation and great respect. One of the delights of the
year is when quite large extended Asian family come down and play football on
the football pitch alongside us which they've done each year.
Unfortunately they got rained off the football this year but they still
came and it's good to see them. Yes we get quite a lot of people from the Birmingham area which is really nice.
So in your time of the nearly ten years of running the self-catering cottage
have you had any interesting events happen? Any quirky stories to tell?
I don't think quirky. Basically the people who come very quickly turn out to be
friends and it's a very pleasant situation of these people reappearing
year after year and restarting the friendships that we developed here
before. We have Matt and Judith coming this weekend. Matt's a great guy he's
very enthusiastic, he's also very tall and slim and he does everything that
the valley offers and he does it one after the other. So you'll see
him coming back from a fishing trip in his fishing gear which he strips off
gets into his cycling gear and then off he goes cycling. They come back and go
walking, they bring their telescope down and go out and examine the night sky.
They really do everything that the valley offers and as they do it one
thing after another with enormous enthusiasm. Were you going to offer
something there Maggie in terms of workiness? The cotton feet. Right, Maggie's
reminding me that each year we have a coffee morning in aid of the Bracken
Trust which takes place on the first Saturday of August each year. Yes, I see
the sign at the end of the bridge. That's right and it's a very successful event. We
opened up a garage which is also now my studio and we have coffees and teas on
offer in there and cake and then there's a we work. I should have
mentioned the garden and the fact that I initially began to lay out something of
a formal garden alongside the house but then got inspired by the idea of a
forest garden and we explored forest gardens and so the bulk of the garden is
laid out as a forest garden with the three layers of trees, shrubs and
herbage all fruit producing and food producing so that means that we have a
huge amount of fruit each year and each year through June and July mainly we
turn that into jam which we sell at our coffee morning. The activity I disturbed
you doing this morning. We actually produce I think last year we produced
something approaching 150 jars of jam for the coffee morning. We then go on to
produce more later on when the apples, pears and particularly the quinces come
out and then we buy in oranges in January for the marmalade so we produce a great
deal of fruit during the year and that's a major feature of the coffee morning
and one that attracts a lot of people to return to us each year to buy their
ration of jam for the year. And how did you get involved in the Bracken Trust?
Well Maggie had had cancer before we left the drovers in 2006 and had become
a client of the Bracken Trust and had been helped enormously by them so we've
always been involved with the Bracken Trust. We've done cooking for them. They
have a Tuesday lunch and for many years we cooked for that every now and again
and went took out the food in and served it. We also got involved in the
Bracken Singers who are a group of singers who are patients, volunteers and
family members of people that have been involved with cancer and we go around
singing and raising money for the trust. So the the garden party is an extension
the coffee morning is an extension of that and one which has been very
successful for us the last couple of years we've raised just below a thousand
pounds from it in two hours which is really good going. We sell our jam and
our plants and because they are ours we're able to add gift aid onto that.
And then other Bracken Trust stalls sell cake, bric-a-brac, books and so
and there's always a raffle. So these are all raised money and I say over the
past two years we've been very close to the thousand. Bitterly disappointed last
year that we didn't get over the thousand having made just below it the
year before but hopefully this year will be the year.
Yes, well well done on that. And you mentioned your arch as well. Tell me a little bit more about that.
Well that's a difficult area for me to talk about because I was hoped I think
that when we retired I would commit myself fully to becoming a proper artist
in inverted commas. I've never done that. The garden, my Quakerism and just things
like accounts and all this sort of stuff always prevent me from doing from
getting a hundred percent involvement so my paintings are very few and far between.
I was doing a monthly life drawing class which meant that at least I was
doing some drawing and I am part of the Aarhusly artists group and again that
pushes me towards painting at least once a month but I'm afraid I put other
priorities ahead of that constantly and also my painting is always very
experimental and I move through all sorts of different styles and techniques
and as I explore trying to find my own sort of handwriting and my own purpose.
So you don't stick to one particular medium? Not at all.
Exploratory art. That's wonderful. So you told me earlier that you're involved with
the Ellen Valley Social Club. Can you tell me a little bit more about that and how
you got involved with that? Well we're not terribly involved at this
moment but of course the the bonfire takes place right outside our house so
we have always been a supporter of that and provide the electricity for the
the burger tent which is directly outside our front fence. We have been in
the past, I was treasurer for a few years when we first came, but that again
provided yet another reason why I shouldn't be doing art or anything else
and so I was quite glad to unload that after a few years. We also got
involved in some of the trips away largely from our point of
view that we felt that if by buying a ticket we enabled the thing to happen
then it was worthwhile doing it but we were always rather hoping I think that
we would get the message back that it's oversold and we could then not
necessarily go on the trip itself but just help to fund. So again that's
something that we haven't done much of recently. I think it's amazing that
there is a social club which is so active and does pull together all the
farmers and the residents of the village within the two valleys and I
think it's brilliant that that happens.
You mentioned about the bonfire that the social club holds. How many people come
to that? Well it's got to be in excess of a thousand. It's an amazing event. It is
quite the best bonfire within the area so people come from Bills, Raird, Llandridnod
to see it and probably Llandridnod as well and it really attracts huge crowds.
The social club have throughout the years done a very good job of making
sure that everyone is trained up in health and safety and that the event is
safe for all those who participate either as watchers or as workers. St. John's
ambulance are brilliant in that they come and stand by in case of any injury
and as far as I know have never been called upon. So it shows how safe the
whole thing is but it involves huge amount of preparation with two Sundays
beforehand of wood collection and the building of the bonfire and the
preparation of the firework igniting site and then on the day the actual
firing off of both the bonfire and then the fireworks themselves. And have you
gone with the modern trend to hold it either the weekend before? No we've always
stuck with the 5th and I think that's one of the things that makes it good the
fact that everyone knows it's going to be on the 5th. Of course that does mean
that sometimes we hold it in pouring rain and sometimes on a lovely clear
night everyone can really enjoy it. Yes. Since Ellon Valley got its dark sky
status have you been further up, you know, sort of any on any of the events that they've
held? We haven't been involved in the events but we always encourage our
visitors to really appreciate the sky because you can only appreciate
the night sky when the clouds allow it. Yes. We do seem to have a huge
amount of cloud here but quite often when there is a clear night our
visitors go out and photograph it and one in particular who I've already
mentioned comes in with his telescope. I think people from here have
gone out with their telescopes up onto the hill on the way out to Pantadour
and also of course up the valley and it seems to be that most of the
photographs seem to feature the Lavoieuil Tower so that seems to be a very popular
place. I suppose with your visitors you get to see their photographs after living out for the day so it's like rediscovering the valley all over again. That's right.
There must be some wonderful shots that you've seen. Have you recall any other major changes in the valley over the 10-15 years you've been here?
Well it has changed enormously I think in that 10 years. The visitor centre has changed tremendously.
Of course when we first came they closed on the Sunday before the 5th of November so the end of October
and then didn't reopen until birthday the Easter of the following year.
So that change made a lot of difference. I think now people have really appreciated the new tea rooms at Pennebont
and our visitors are going to that very regularly. We also mentioned to them the new cafe at Raiders of the Lost Ark and they've appreciated that one as well.
So those are things that people are certainly very appreciative of. I'm very hopeful for the increased amount of interpretation that's coming into the valley now.
That's greatly appreciated. I've always wished and hoped that the suspension bridge might feature in the interpretation and the development of the valley.
It always seemed to me that it would be sensible to utilise the Bailey Bridge only for motor traffic and to use a restored suspension bridge.
Not only as a thing of great beauty and something which really fits the valley incredibly well but that it could become the cycle and pedestrian crossing of the river.
We find as we turn onto the bridge as we drive home that quite often you are faced with a family right across the bridge, toddlers, dogs, prams who are totally amazed by the fact that there is a car approaching them.
As far as they're concerned they are walking in parkland and they don't expect to have traffic. That's something that I would have loved to have seen. I'm saddened by the fact that it wasn't involved in the planning.
My understanding is that it was put in the original project plan for the Allen Lynx project as one of their things to do. Unfortunately the cost of repairing that bridge is too much.
They had to take it out. People do keep asking about this.
It's such a beautiful thing and it's so much a part of the history of the valley.
As of course our little pedestrian bridges. That was able to be restored wonderfully by the Army who did it I think from memory over a weekend.
I mean that's a much simpler operation but they did an incredibly good job of it.
When was that done?
I think about two years ago but I'm going from memory.
That was originally put in because the original village, the wooden village, was dry with no alcohol allowed which was very sensible for the time.
But then the Allen Valley Hotel was developed seeing the potential and the bridge was put in as a way of getting to the hotel.
But it's used to a tremendous extent by people who really appreciate being able to cross the river and stand and look at the river.
Yes, it's a lovely spot.
It is a delightful spot. You can sometimes, very occasionally, see a kingfisher flashing by.
We do get a gusander. We had a gusander. Gusanders of course nest in woodland.
So they actually nest up in the Cairn Gaffa woods.
And then at some point in the spring, Mother Hen gathers up her brood of something like nine chicks and starts marching them off towards the river.
And they'd actually march through the garden of number ten.
And this caused great interest and the interest rather frightened the hen.
So she took off and flew right around the house, i.e. both houses, picked up her brood by approaching from the other side and then continued marching them off to the river.
She then hides them very successfully in the undergrowth at the side of the river and they grow up there.
And we had heard in earlier years of gusanders being seen on the river.
This was wonderful to see her marching her brood through the garden. That was incredible.
And what are the birdlife dippers?
Oh, we have one couple who can only be described as twitchers.
There is no other word to describe them.
They're a delightful couple who come from Norfolk and spend their whole year going from one bird reserve to another.
And Cairn Gaffa is one of those that they visit and then use us as a base to get over to Machanlleth and the big reserve over there.
And it's here, isn't it?
And they record in excess of 50 species each time they come.
Gosh. We need to talk to them about what they've recorded. That would be good.
And strangely enough, every year they seem to fail to find either a dipper or a tree creeper.
And yet they're things that are fairly easy to find.
I'm always surprised that they have that difficulty, but they have that difficulty almost every year.
Obviously the dippers and the tree creepers know they're coming.
Yes, I think they must do. But I think if they had those two as well, they would be pushing up towards the 60.
So what do you think the future holds for the valley? Where do you think it will be?
Oh, it's going to become much more popular.
Even more people coming to walk around it and to appreciate it, which probably means a lot more car traffic and car parking,
which conceivably could become problems that would have to be addressed.
I think, by the way, that one thing that would be a great help would be we've used this plastic stuff.
Up at the top of the garden where we have a flint on our drive.
And to allow wheelchairs and other wheeled vehicles, wheeled things to use the gravel, we put these plastic beds in,
which you can then fill with gravel or allow grass to grass over.
And I think the side of the road in the village is going to have to be treated in that way because of the amount of parking that's now taking place.
I mean, the Ellen Lynx parking is usually anything up to a dozen cars.
And then you can have another dozen further down by the toilets of temporary visitors.
And temporary visitors are tending now to park further and further up this end.
So I think that is something which needs to be addressed in a way that is commensurate with the feel of the village.
So it doesn't change the feel of the village.
And I think that sort of plastic bedding would be a way of doing that.
Yes, that's one of the difficulties, isn't it, in modern life? Everybody drives to get to where they want.
Yeah.
Thank you very much for that, Peter. It's been fascinating talking to you.
I'm most, most grateful for your time.
Thank you.